Adam, I was excited to see how excited you got when you heard about the news today about
the acquisition.
You were on your stream, and you just-
I'm so excited.
Yeah.
I'd love to hear more about that.
Yeah, no.
You told me Shopify acquires remix, and then I went on and on about how excited I was before
I realized half of what you were saying.
You explained that it was hydrogen, they were the first to adopt react components, but I'm
like not reading chat, and I'm just like, "This is so crazy, oh my word," and then like
I didn't understand half the plot, so it seems the writer.
Yeah, that whole goes deep in this one.
Oh, yeah.
I can't wait to unpack it.
I don't even know where to start, do you have thoughts on where to start here?
No, I guess let's just lay out what happened, I guess, and so it's all happening.
It's unfolding right now, so there's going to be more that's probably happening as we're
talking about it, but yeah, news this morning, remix acquired by Shopify, which is pretty
crazy because people have been wondering, "Remix is the underdog, are they going to be
able to take on Next.js on their own for sales backing and all this stuff," but now they're
backed by Shopify.
So one huge on its own, then Fred from Astro tweeted, he actually read through the blog post
in the roadmap, and Shopify seems to be suggesting that their own framework, which they've been
building, Hydrogen, which was the only other React Server component framework, is going
to be moving away from RSC, which is a really big deal, I think the narrative is really
interesting where, you know, Next.js conference happened, React Server components was released,
everyone wanted to try it, I know you have a lot of thoughts on this, and it felt like
half-baked, terrible, like not good, then Shopify is announcing, "Well, we're not going
to be using it either, we just prefer to use React Router and that whole model."
Yeah, can you unpack that for me?
Because it looked like when I read the posts, I didn't read the whole thing, but I read
parts of it, quoted parts on tweets and stuff.
It sounded like they were saying, "For now, is there a chance they're going to still use
RSCs in the future?
Did you see that?"
They definitely hedged a lot, and every single place where someone said something about
moving away from RSC, they like prefaced it or qualified it by saying, "We still believe
RSCs are great in the future, and we're really excited that we think that's a future of
React, but we're not using them, right?"
So it's like, yeah, it is interesting.
So I think ultimately, and we were just having a meeting at SST, and we ended up talking
about a bunch about this as well, because now Next and React are so tied together, any
fumble that Next does or Vercel does splashes back on a React, right?
Yeah.
Oh, sure.
So I think RSCs are fine and great, and they're going to be really-- they're going to be good
and they're going to work the way they're advertised.
But I think Next kind of fumbled this release, and like, you know, with people trying it
out, and the bundle size are bigger, there's a lot of questions and ambiguity around it.
Yeah.
And I want to get into that a lot, because I think that's so much of this story to me
is the Vercel response, the Guillermo response, like all of this stuff.
But I guess, like, so to summarize here, Shopify buying remix, Shopify powers, like, everything
that's e-commerce, but Amazon, right?
Like, they are it for e-commerce.
So now you've got remix, and they sort of build a lot of tooling for developers who
are building storefronts, right?
Like, Shopify provides all this, like, in the past, they've got APIs for interacting
with your merchant account and all that, but they also provide, like, front-end stuff,
right?
And so now, presumably, remix is going to be the way people build their Shopify stores.
Is that parsed correctly?
Yeah, I think that makes sense.
I think from the beginning, remix felt like a weird set of trade-offs, like, the way that
they say you should build stuff.
But that set of trade-offs made perfect sense for e-commerce, and I would argue, like, maybe
for nothing else.
Yeah.
So, teaming up with Shopify is perfect.
Yeah, and that's the next JS thing, too, right?
Like, it's mostly, it fits really well in terms of feature set for e-commerce, and that's
what they always cite, like, at the conference they just said.
It's like, here's all the major e-commerce stores using next JS in Versailles.
So it's a big deal to Versailles if remix falls into the hands of Shopify, where, presumably,
there's a lot of next-ish stores built for Shopify, I guess.
Yeah, and I think that's where Versailles makes a lot of money, because I think we're
talking about this in a previous podcast, where e-commerce stores deliver a lot of traffic
with, like, high-quality images, like, all this stuff, and Versailles gets to charge people
for that.
Yeah.
So, yeah, it's, like, it's really interesting, and it goes right to the heart of their business
model, I think.
Yeah, and did you see any of the Guillermo response tweets, because there's been stuff?
Yeah.
I saw the one where he was kind of stuff tweeting, like, "Oh, you don't want your front-end coupled
with your back-end," and something like that, which is really odd, because I don't think
remakes is going to get, like, Shopify-specific features.
That doesn't really make sense.
I think it's just going to be a framework that you can use with Shopify or with other
stuff if you want.
So I think that was kind of a weird.
I think he, like, he should have a workshop that one more, because you're going to get
a response.
And it just drew attention to the fact that, well, actually, next JS in Bursailles are coupled.
Yeah, exactly.
That's the big, such, like, everybody's sort of piled on, the pot calling the kettle black.
I don't want to just keep talking and jumping straight to Bursailles and next JS, but that's
just where my head's at right now.
I guess, like, for the Shopify remix situation, they're going to continue to operate remix
as this open-source unit, like, they're going to keep doing what they've been doing.
The remix folks aren't, like, suddenly working on Shopify internal stuff.
They're building remix just as they have them, but they've got this backing.
So now, I think one of them, Michael Jackson, or I can't remember, Ryan, one of them pointed
out that it's a huge deal for a framework like this, just for any open-source framework,
to now have, like, an indefinite timeline, like, they have financial backing, they don't
have to worry about money.
They can focus on building.
It's just a whole other element to this whole thing.
Is that all accurate?
Did I get all that right?
That they're stating?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think so.
And for a couple of minutes, I had to Shopify.
This is...
The numbers are probably pretty low for them.
It's probably, like, a good deal.
Even though they're probably really high, like, subjectively.
But for them, you know, to hire two developers of that quality, to work on something like
this, like, it's like a tiny fraction of anything else they spend their money on.
So Shopify gets to, I mean, it's an acquisition, right?
They're acquiring...
It's like an Aquaire.
I don't know if you can acquire MIT license software, but they're going to have some say,
right, over Ryan and Michael's focus, like, what they're building into remix.
Like, it's going to be better and better all the time for e-commerce use cases, I would
imagine.
Yeah.
I wonder what degree, like, even needs to specialize that hard.
I feel like just their model, just making that better and more complete and, like, seeing
through their vision, coincidentally happens to work well for e-commerce, so I think that
might be enough for a long time.
And I'm sure they, like, negotiated all of that because they had probably, after working
independently for so long, and they'd have probably wanted to retain that control.
Yeah.
Sorry.
And then, on the Shopify benefits side, like, what they're going to get, I assume they're
going to...
Like, I wasn't jumping to conclusions, but I had that they're going to, like, package
some of remix up into their dev tools that they provide to merchants.
Is that presumptuous?
Or does it say in the blog post?
I should read the blog post.
No, I don't think, well, I don't think they explicitly mentioned any of that.
And I think if they do that, it'll be...
I don't think they need to do that any time soon, but, yeah, I guess, hydrogen...
Can you explain hydrogen to me, because I've never used or known anything about hydrogen?
Yeah.
I'm also a little bit...
I'm, like, not super familiar with it.
Or I'm not...
I don't know it to a crazy degree either, but yeah, it is a React-based framework that...
It's kind of what you're describing.
It's a little bit more that I give you stuff to build storefronts with, for you to find
things where it all works.
And the interesting part is they really focused on the architecture of it so that it renders
in a way that is efficient for e-commerce.
So I think they will...
I honestly feel like the remix team might just go work on React Router more and just make
all the remix features, and they've already been doing this, but it's bringing all the
features to React Router, and then hydrogen will just use React Router.
So they're still kind of independent, but there's a nice energy there.
And hydrogen can be like the very Shopify-focused effort.
Yeah.
So I can remember, I've played with Shopify in the past.
I was building a thing that involved a Shopify plugin.
And I can remember, like, if you want to build a Shopify site for your store, your e-commerce
store, and have it be completely headless, kind of getting to gear modes tweet where
he said like they should allow Shopify merchants to build with any front end or whatever and
use their back end APIs.
They do allow you to do that unless things have changed.
You just have to have one of the like expensive premium accounts if they should be doing business.
Yeah.
So like the current, if you're not one of those premium customers, you build with all
the Shopify UI stuff and you don't think that part, or is that hydrogen?
I'm not sure I understand like how it all fits into, I'm a merchant, I want to store
on Shopify.
Am I choosing remix and remix-like technologies more in the future, or does it not affect
it at all based on this deal?
I think, yeah.
I do think they have to figure out their pricing model because you can't, yeah, you're right.
The tier is so high.
I think it's like several thousand a month.
Yeah, it's a lot.
For the headless API, and I do wonder why they structured it that way, but it like eliminates
the type of person that's just going to pick up remix and try to build any commerce because
you literally can't do that.
But also the kind of person who would take a next JS project, like build a next JS storefront,
I guess.
Yeah.
It seems like they're really focused on the funnel of when you're small, use our no code
tools, when you're successful, build your own thing.
Yeah.
It makes sense historically, but I think now there's just so many good tools for building
e-commerce front ends, like remakes, and actually all these things.
Yeah.
So, yeah, I feel like they got to figure out their pricing there, if it makes sense.
So the bigger story here then, I think I'm still missing the plot because I think I keep
circling around trying to find something bigger, but the big story here is maybe a not vote
of confidence.
What's a lack of vote of confidence?
An anti-vote of confidence for RSCs in hydrogen, and the financial backing that now the remix
team will have to continue competing with next JS and Versailles and the others.
Is that accurate?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, I think the vote of no confidence, I guess, I don't know if it's that dramatic,
like they hedged everywhere they said stuff, but you can say stuff, I think the actions
matter more.
They're not betting on it now, and they have a business running, they have to make bets
that make sense.
Yeah.
And they're choosing not to bet on RSCs for the time being, just a timing of everything
I think is insane.
I think there's been all these negative feelings around just a confusion around RSCs and next
13, and then now someone who should really be pro RSC that's been doing it for a long
time is also bailing, it just doesn't look good.
So let's talk about all that confusion.
This is the thing that I'm most, it's in my head right now.
So next year, 13, they just launched at next comp, and I thought next year, 13 would be
the thing that was pretty baked.
Like if Turbo Pack is a thing that is clearly very unbaked, they're just still mixing stuff
in the mixing bowl, then I thought like next 13 and all the routing stuff, the layouts
RFC, all of that, I assumed was pretty well done, like ready for public consumption.
But so far, it sounds a lot like the next 13, the layouts, the routing, all of it makes
sense except it's still a giant client bundle, no matter what you do with server components,
there's server components by default in the app directory.
As far as I know, there's people building projects and I should do this, but with entirely
server components, no client components whatsoever.
And it's like a bigger bundle than ever.
So is this a, you said, maybe this is the next JS fumble of herself humble, not so much
a react server component fumble, but can you, what do you understand of the whole thing?
I've been asking, I don't seem to get any answers.
Yeah.
I was going to ask you, have you, have you seen anyone get a good result yet?
No.
Because I saw people who replies me like, well, you did XYZ wrong.
Oh, no.
I've not seen a single example, like a single project that was like, look here, you did
the right thing, you turned on the right experimental flag or whatever.
Now the bundles are tiny.
Haven't seen it.
Oh, yeah.
So I, from what I understand about RSCs, I feel like this is, it's just not packaged.
Like I don't know what they're doing.
They did something wrong.
It shouldn't be worse than next 12, which is what I'm seeing.
That seems impossible.
Like RSCs can't be that bad, right?
Yeah.
So yeah, I think, I don't know, it just feels like maybe I haven't heard anything from
them either.
I feel like there's like this big vacuum of, yes, wait, what?
And I haven't seen anyone from their side clarifying, even just saying, oh, you guys
are right.
This isn't working right now, but it's going to work.
So I saw Dan or somebody.
Oh, I think it was somebody from the React team say that, oh, yeah, next 13 is missing
this XYZ optimization, which sounds like the whole thing.
Like if it's not pulling JavaScript out of the bundle, it's the whole point, what we've
been sold on the whole next 13 server components, all of this was like small bundles and not
shipping JavaScript if you don't need to.
And that's not the case.
And when is it going to be the case?
Yeah.
Okay.
I think something clicked for me.
What happened was Vercel was very excited about the API changes that RSCs provide right
before you had like get server side props, all these things.
And now there's like one clean way to do everything.
Yeah.
Like whether it's client, whether it's ISR, whether it's SSR, like there's just one very
natural react way of fetching data.
That's probably what they were super excited about and excited a demo because that stuff
works, right?
Yeah.
But I think everyone, what made what they have missed is everyone is so trained on these
performance things now, just because it's been the conversation for the past year.
Everyone's obsessed with this.
So I almost was like, people are like, don't really care about the API change, which are
I think good and will clean up all the code.
It just seems like everyone's glossing over that.
And they just focus on the performance thing, which maybe Vercel expected it to be the other
way around.
We're like, oh, they can wait for the performance stuff.
They're going to be excited about the API.
I think they just didn't read the room.
Like you've got all these HTML first frameworks that are making more and more buzz.
Everyone's really excited about shipping as little JavaScript as possible.
Yeah.
And I mean, for e-commerce, that makes sense, right?
Like, you should be shipping as little JavaScript as possible, like 160k bundle for a storefront.
That's bad.
Like, right?
Am I crazy?
Yeah.
No, that is bad.
And I feel like really interactive apps I've built haven't even been that big.
Right.
Yeah.
It's worse than like a spa.
And it's not supposed to be.
It's supposed to be this other thing.
So I just think like most of the conversation, at least in Twitter circles and wherever else,
like most of the conversation these days is very performance aware.
Like people know how big bundles are and how big the React runtime is.
And like all these things, people are very aware.
So I think it's pretty crazy to me that no one on their side expected this kind of pushback
or this kind of confusion when the bundles are giant and we're using server components.
And that was the whole thing, I thought.
I don't know.
Yeah, and yelling at class right now.
What else?
What else happened?
I think, oh, there was some more details about remixes of business.
I don't know if you saw that Ryan Florence tweeted some stuff about it.
He mentioned that.
Do you remember that remix used to be a private or proprietary framework, your license?
Pay for the license.
Yeah.
So he said they were closing in on 200k ARR prior to their 1.0.
AR, annual, okay, occurring 200, okay.
So like, okay, I think the license must renew every year or something.
Otherwise, it's so one time they wouldn't be ARR.
Yeah.
So then they, they, then they decided to erase VC so that they could, what did they say?
So they could.
Oh, I did see this tweet.
Yeah.
So they could skip, like having a focus on growing AR in the short term.
And now that was a focus.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
So that was interesting because everyone's been curious about like what was their business
model and what did it look like when they were charging.
So yeah, 200k ARR, you know, for, it's not that big, but I'm surprised it was.
Yeah.
I was going to say, but what it was, what it was, I'm pretty surprised for proprietary
framework.
200k ARR.
Very good.
Yeah.
Interesting.
I don't.
Yeah.
The whole remix crap.
I just don't know.
Like I've never played, but they've actually built anything with remix.
Yeah.
I've played with it.
We actually support remix on SST is I want to, we don't support next very well.
We support remakes incredibly well.
Yeah.
Well, cause it's a lot easier to deploy, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Like X is a nightmare to deploy.
That was funny.
I saw a gearmo tweet.
I keep bringing all this back to gearmo in Vercelle, but I saw a gearmo tweet that was
like about, he was trying to combat the whole argument that you can't deploy next anywhere
else.
And it was like, you can deploy it on AWS and yada, yada, yada, and like, I've know all
these sites that, that are doing that.
It's impossible.
It's not impossible.
But it's a lot of work.
And to have all the features is just a fool's errand you're just not keeping up with all
the features they roll out.
Next 13.
Now, I don't think the open source solution for deploying next JS on AWS is that serverless
next JS framework.
It's like an open source library.
There's like a single maintainer and he's trying to get out there.
He's done.
It's been done.
It's completely about it.
Yeah.
It was on next 11.
They couldn't get next 12 done.
And now there's 13.
So yeah.
Yeah.
We've tried.
We really tried.
Yeah.
So, so the remix, what is it with the remix crew though?
Why are they, why are they so bitter?
That's just the only, my only question is like, why are they so angry on the internet?
I don't know.
This is like, especially if they're getting a fire.
Yeah.
It was a great day for them.
And I feel like the last month they've surely known this.
And why are they even salty at all?
I'd be like doing my victory lap, just not saying it yet.
Like, yeah, everything is timing out amazing for them.
But I think, I just feel this is the way they, they like living their life.
Like this is what they're into is the way they want to interact with the world and how
they want to get their stuff out there.
I think, yeah, like you said, for me, it's like, oh, now I can chill.
I'm not stressed anymore.
Because we were perceiving it as the angst comes from the stress of being this underdog,
trying to get something out there and like worried about being crushed.
Yeah.
But now they have like backing, they don't have to worry anymore.
But it's still the same.
So I guess it was never angst driven, it's just like they still have the same like chip
on their shoulder because they're still like gearmo still talking down to them on Twitter.
And like, yeah, they're still having to deal with the like, are we relevant?
Is it just a next year's world that we live in that whole thing?
I guess that makes sense.
That's another thing.
I feel like I hadn't seen gearmo tweet anything specific and like, I've been following him
forever.
I feel like I just generally hear like, read tweets about next year's or their events.
And all of a sudden, there's like, you know, like, yeah, out of nowhere.
So that behavior changes all something to note, you know, Oh, for sure.
I know I've been reading the gearmo tea leaves.
I can't help it.
Like I went through his tweets and replies, I'm just like reading everything he's tweeted
in the last 24 hours, just after this announcement.
And I've just not seen him be this like vocally against other things.
It always felt like Vercel was kind of up on this mountain above everything else.
They just above the fray, they didn't have to think about other competitors or like acknowledge
their existence.
That has definitely changed in some tangible sense.
And it's interesting that they just came off their big conference.
Big moment for them.
This should be like peak Vercel excitement and does not seem that that is the case.
I mean, just based on gearmo tweets, I don't know, I'm reading into a lot, but we got it.
It's just, it's so fun.
All this.
It's just so fun.
I was so excited when I saw it today, because I saw this morning and I started watching
your stream and I was like, I'm an idiot, how did that not bring us up already?
It's been like 20 minutes.
Yeah.
And I brought it up and you're like, boom, like, like flew into it.
This is so exciting.
I, yeah, I just, I feel like things are changing the most they've changed in the web landscape
in a long time.
And I do think this is the year, I think it's just a high likelihood.
I feel like five years from now, we're looking back at this kind of time period where things
started to change.
And I don't know what it all looks like, but I do think there's a lot of interesting players
in the space, like a lot of frameworks that are very compelling and look more compelling
all the time.
And if you already were looking for a reason not to use React, you're just kind of tired
of it.
If you've been building with React for five years, there's, there's a lot of interesting
places you can look now.
Yeah, we were talking about this earlier where we love, like I said, we have a remix
contract that works perfectly.
We love building stuff for these new frameworks, like remakes, we're doing one for Astro, we're
doing one for Solid Start, we're going to do one for Svelte Kit.
It's so easy for us because all these frameworks standardize around HTTP request.
We do our magic.
Here's the HTTP response.
Just make sure you serve that correctly and everything's just going to work.
And that is like so easy for us to implement.
We can just support all of these frameworks on AWS really easily.
And it really feels like, oh, these projects are architected for like the future, like they're
going to be deployed serverlessly on AWS, on Cloudflare, like wherever you need it, it's
going to work exactly the same way.
That feels definitely different than the story around next JS in Brazil.
Yeah.
Next JS feels like it's designed around building something that only Vercel can run.
I mean, it has to be right.
Like there's no way, I know they would never like admit that, but there's no way that doesn't
play into their consideration in terms of the roadmap.
Like they know they got a way to deploy next JS, a lot of people use next JS and you need
to run it on Vercel if you don't want pain.
And they can point to a few cases of huge companies that deploy it in other ways.
But ultimately, like that's, that's their whole thing.
And it drives, has to drive their product roadmap, I would think.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
And I think like who's, who actually offers like a commercial solution for next JS outside
of that?
I think I think Netlify has now.
Netlify.
Yeah.
And amplify.
Amplify.
I think amplifies is going to get a little better.
I think right now, I don't know what Amplify does, but I think it's getting ready to support
more of the features.
I think they're going to go more of the containerized, like the Netlify route where like they're
running next JS and managing the infrastructure for you, not just deploying it into serverless
stuff.
I don't actually, I don't know yet.
I do know, amplify, not leaking anything.
This is just the current amplify implementation uses that abandoned open source library.
Yeah.
As do we.
Just like SST.
So they're moving away from that into more of the Netlify model, which I think Netlify
runs it in containers.
It's running next to us.
So they get all the features, just like Vercel does, but the only people like Netlify or AWS
can compete with a Vercel, I mean, like smaller, it's hard for like SST.
You guys can't, well, maybe you can, but run.
No, it's hard.
We can't.
We tried and we've, we did.
I think now we Frank tried and he's like bloodied by the effort and we're talking about
his offering a container version of it as well because yeah, like it's going to take a full
time team to support those features.
Yep.
Oh man.
All the drama.
I love it.
I feel like I've probably missed like five tweets that are really juicy just in the time
we've been talking.
Yeah.
And they also announced it in, um, they're not so early.
So like me and you, like if a time zone we're in, it's, uh, like it works for us.
Yeah.
I think a lot of people woke up to the drama already on fellow people on the West Coast.
I haven't seen.
They're still rolling out of bed in the West Coast.
I think.
Yeah.
Like the usual people commenting on this.
I haven't seen them comment on it yet.
So I think they maybe haven't even woken up and seen it yet.
Yeah.
I think the best is still yet to come.
Still to come.
Well, this has been fun.
I really am enjoying this.
We can talk about whatever we want podcasts coming from like having an AWS podcast.
Now it's like there's no, no limits to what we could talk about in one episode, really.
Yeah.
As long as the dev world keeps providing us with drama every single week, I think, I think
we're safe.
I think we're safe.
Yeah.
Keep continuing to happen.
All right.
Do you have anything else you want to say on this?
No, I think that's it.
Yeah.
Same.
All right.
Thanks, Max.
See you.